Query ID:870592575232716800
Query:
Jeremy Corbyn: Labour could write off historic student debts| All those in early 20's with student debt #VoteLabour

Gold:Student debt: what did Labour say?  Jeremy Corbyn didn’t commit to abolishing student debt before the last election, although he did say he would “deal with” the high debts of graduates and was looking at ways to do so.  The official Labour policy for existing graduates was that they would be protected from above inflation interest rate rises on existing debt and Labour would “look for ways to ameliorate this debt burden in future.” This policy was not mentioned in the party’s manifesto.  Mr Corbyn did say in an interview with NME magazine a week before the 2017 general election that he was “looking at” ways to reduce, ameliorate, or lengthen the period of time that “those that currently have a massive debt” have to pay it off. He also said he didn’t “have a simple answer for it at this stage”.  Those who didn’t see the detail of Mr Corbyn’s comments may have got a stronger impression from some of the wider news headlines. The Times reported “Labour promises to write off graduate debt”, and iNews reported “Jeremy Corbyn: Labour will write off graduate debt”—specifying in the detail of the article that it was something Mr Corbyn had “suggested”.  Other Labour figures during the election campaign did hint that abolishing—as opposed to reducing—debt was the policy.  During the interview Mr Corbyn is quoted as saying:  “First of all, we want to get rid of student fees altogether ... “We’ll do it as soon as we get in, and we’ll then introduce legislation to ensure that any student going from the 2017-18 academic year will not pay fees. They will pay them, but we’ll rebate them when we’ve got the legislation through – that’s fundamentally the principle behind it. “Yes, there is a block of those that currently have a massive debt, and I’m looking at ways that we could reduce that, ameliorate that, lengthen the period of paying it off, or some other means of reducing that debt burden ... “I don’t have the simple answer for it at this stage – I don’t think anybody would expect me to, because this election was called unexpectedly; we had two weeks to prepare all of this – but I’m very well aware of that problem ... “And I don’t see why those that had the historical misfortune to be at university during the £9,000 period should be burdened excessively compared to those that went before or those that come after. I will deal with it.”  Some Labour figures have sown confusion about the policy  Both Jeremy Corbyn and the Shadow Chancellor, John McDonnell, said in interviews after the election that abolishing student debt was never promised, but that it was a “real ambition”. The Shadow Education Secretary, Angela Rayner, also told MPs that this was never the promise.  During the election, however, some Labour figures seemed to have sown confusion about the policy.  Labour’s shadow justice minister Imran Hussain said in a video that “every existing student will have all their debts wiped off”. Another shadow minister, Sharon Hodgson, tweeted that “Labour could write off historic student debts| All those in early 20's with student debt”.  The first doesn’t say that graduates would also have their debts wiped off, and the second doesn’t say the pledge is a certainty. Nevertheless, compared to Mr Corbyn’s “looking at ways that we could reduce that, ameliorate that, lengthen the period of paying it off, or some other means of reducing that debt burden”, both interventions could have given voters the wrong idea about what was being promised.

Before Ranking Candidates:
1. Student debt: what did Labour say?  Jeremy Corbyn didn’t commit to abolishing student debt before the last election, although he did say he would “deal with” the high debts of graduates and was looking at ways to do so.  The official Labour policy for existing graduates was that they would be protected from above inflation interest rate rises on existing debt and Labour would “look for ways to ameliorate this debt burden in future.” This policy was not mentioned in the party’s manifesto.  Mr Corbyn did say in an interview with NME magazine a week before the 2017 general election that he was “looking at” ways to reduce, ameliorate, or lengthen the period of time that “those that currently have a massive debt” have to pay it off. He also said he didn’t “have a simple answer for it at this stage”.  Those who didn’t see the detail of Mr Corbyn’s comments may have got a stronger impression from some of the wider news headlines. The Times reported “Labour promises to write off graduate debt”, and iNews reported “Jeremy Corbyn: Labour will write off graduate debt”—specifying in the detail of the article that it was something Mr Corbyn had “suggested”.  Other Labour figures during the election campaign did hint that abolishing—as opposed to reducing—debt was the policy.  During the interview Mr Corbyn is quoted as saying:  “First of all, we want to get rid of student fees altogether ... “We’ll do it as soon as we get in, and we’ll then introduce legislation to ensure that any student going from the 2017-18 academic year will not pay fees. They will pay them, but we’ll rebate them when we’ve got the legislation through – that’s fundamentally the principle behind it. “Yes, there is a block of those that currently have a massive debt, and I’m looking at ways that we could reduce that, ameliorate that, lengthen the period of paying it off, or some other means of reducing that debt burden ... “I don’t have the simple answer for it at this stage – I don’t think anybody would expect me to, because this election was called unexpectedly; we had two weeks to prepare all of this – but I’m very well aware of that problem ... “And I don’t see why those that had the historical misfortune to be at university during the £9,000 period should be burdened excessively compared to those that went before or those that come after. I will deal with it.”  Some Labour figures have sown confusion about the policy  Both Jeremy Corbyn and the Shadow Chancellor, John McDonnell, said in interviews after the election that abolishing student debt was never promised, but that it was a “real ambition”. The Shadow Education Secretary, Angela Rayner, also told MPs that this was never the promise.  During the election, however, some Labour figures seemed to have sown confusion about the policy.  Labour’s shadow justice minister Imran Hussain said in a video that “every existing student will have all their debts wiped off”. Another shadow minister, Sharon Hodgson, tweeted that “Labour could write off historic student debts| All those in early 20's with student debt”.  The first doesn’t say that graduates would also have their debts wiped off, and the second doesn’t say the pledge is a certainty. Nevertheless, compared to Mr Corbyn’s “looking at ways that we could reduce that, ameliorate that, lengthen the period of paying it off, or some other means of reducing that debt burden”, both interventions could have given voters the wrong idea about what was being promised.
2. Jeremy Corbyn has been accused of U-turning on a pledge to scrap student debt.  But that’s not true. The story comes from a single quote plucked from a longer interview.  When read in context, rather than promising to wipe out all student debts, the Labour leader actually admitted that he didn’t have any simple answers to the issue yet.  So what was said, exactly? And has Labour been misleading students?  In the run-up to the general election, Jeremy Corbyn made a comment about student debt. Speaking to the NME about the issue, he said: “I will deal with it.”  At the time, this was not widely picked up on by the national media. But – where it was reported – most papers accurately reflected that Corbyn had not explicitly promised to write off all debts. For instance, the Daily Mail said the Labour leader had pledged to “reduce or even write off” student debt.  But then, on Sunday, Corbyn was quizzed about this remark during a BBC interview.  Presenter Andrew Marr put it to him: “If you are a young voter and you heard those words: ‘I will deal with it’, you might have thought Jeremy Corbyn is going to relieve me of my debt.”  Corbyn was forced to defend his position, saying: “We never said we would completely abolish it.”  For some, this constituted a U-turn.  The Mail said: “Labour has backtracked on its promise to write off £100 billion of student debt.” The Telegraph said the party had “retracted its pledge to abolish student debt”. And Alan Sugar called Jeremy Corbyn a “cheat” and said he should resign for having “lied”.  So, did Corbyn really promise to write-off existing student debt?  It’s true that he promised to “deal” with the problem of people who are “burdened with student debt”. But this was just one sentence from a much longer interview.  The full context is important – and has been ignored by many critics.  He told the NME: “There is a block of those that currently have a massive debt, and I’m looking at ways that we could reduce that, ameliorate that, lengthen the period of paying it off, or some other means of reducing that debt burden.”  He added: “I don’t have the simple answer for it at this stage – I don’t think anybody would expect me to, because this election was called unexpectedly; we had two weeks to prepare all of this. But I’m very well aware of that problem.  “And I don’t see why those that had the historical misfortune to be at university during the £9,000 period should be burdened excessively compared to those that went before or those that come after. I will deal with it.”  In context, it is clear that Corbyn stopped short of making any specific pledge about completely writing-off all student debts.  It’s true that he was appealing to young voters by promising to address the issue and trying to reduce the burden of student debt. But at no point did he make any policy commitments. In fact, he explicitly said that he didn’t have an firm answers yet.  What’s more, none of the possible solutions he mentioned included wiping out all debt. Instead, he talked about reducing or ameliorating (which simply means to make the situation easier) the burden of student debts.  And this was not actually a new Labour position. The party had already said it would “look for ways to ameliorate this debt burden in future”.  Indeed, while Labour’s manifesto promised to “abolish university tuition fees” and said that many young people are “held back by debt”, it made no mention of writing off student debts, or anything similar.  Have other Labour MPs pledged to write off the debt?  After Labour denied changing its policy, two main pieces of further evidence of a U-turn have been circulating.  First is a video of shadow justice minister Imran Hussain, filmed during the election campaign. In it, he comments on the fact that Jeremy Corbyn had announced that “every existing student will have all their debt wiped off”.  Some have claimed that Hussain’s comment appears “at odds with Jeremy Corbyn’s insistence that the party never made that specific pledge”.  But it’s a bit more complicated than that.  The key phrase here is “every existing student“. But it seems that some critics have conflated this with all existing student debt, which would include that held by thousands of graduates. Clearly, however, these are two very different things.  The actual policy announcement Hussain was referring to appears to have been pretty close to what he said it was – a promise to scrap debts for existing students only, rather than historic debts held by graduates.  And this was not a secret pledge consigned to a single YouTube video. It was a major policy announcement that was widely reported in the press.  “To discourage students who are planning to start university this September from deferring until after tuition fees are removed, we will guarantee to immediately write off their first year of fees.  “Students part way through their degree will not have to pay fees for the remainder of their course. Part-time students will be covered for the cost of their first undergraduate degree.”  Regarding the debts of people who have already graduated, Labour did not promise to write these off. Echoing Corbyn’s comments, the party simply said they would consider ways to improve the situation for those concerned.  The only aspect of the policy that Hussain appears to have exaggerated or misunderstood concerns debt already racked up by existing students. The official pledge was to only wipe the debt “for the remainder of their course”, whereas Hussain said existing students would have “all their debt wiped off”.  This was clearly wrong and misleading. But Hussain made no comment about the far more costly issue of wiping all debt for all graduates.  The second example that is being cited as proof of a Labour U-turn is a tweet from a shadow minister, Sharon Hodgson, in which she said that Labour “could write off historic student debts”.  It seems that this was actually a headline from a Politics Home article, following up from the NME interview, rather than her own comment. But that doesn’t diminish her responsibility for the tweet, which does appear to confirm a policy commitment that had not been made.  There is no doubt that these words were very misleading.  In fairness to Hodgson, she did say “could” rather than “will”, but that will do little to reconcile any voters who feel misled by her tweet.  Corbyn has not U-turned on student debt, because he never made a commitment to do this in the first place. He expressed sympathy with debt-laden graduates and promised to help ease the burden on them. But – as far as we can tell – he never pledged to write off all graduate debts.  For Hussain, it is more complicated. The main accusation against Labour concerns U-turning on an alleged promise to wipe the debts of all students and graduates. Hussain made no promises about the debts of graduates but, regarding existing students, he slipped up by saying all debt would be wiped, rather than just the future debts.  Hodgson, on the other hand, posted a highly misleading tweet. Strictly speaking, it was not entirely inaccurate, but it clearly alluded to a policy that the party had not committed to.
3. The issue of tuition fees has been in the spotlight recently as Jeremy Corbyn indicated that a Labour government would “deal with” student debt.  While the party’s 2017 general election manifesto gained notoriety for its promise to scrap tuition fees in England, politicians and commentators in Scotland noted that the policy had already been in place here for a number of years.  However, there are disagreements over which party was responsible for ending tuition fees north of the border.  Reflecting on ten years of SNP governance, Nicola Sturgeon listed the ending of tuition fees as one of her party’s greatest successes.  Ferret Fact Service assessed this claim and found it to be Mostly True  University tuition fees were reintroduced by Tony Blair’s government in 1998, amid huge protest from students and many backbench Labour MPs. The Teaching and Higher Education Act meant students across the UK would pay up to £1000 per year for study.  In Scotland, where university courses were generally completed over four years rather than three, students were given a fee concession, paid for by the Scottish Executive (now known as Scottish Government).  Nicola Sturgeon’s claim is that her party scrapped tuition fees in 2008 during the first Salmond government, however, the up-front fees introduced by Tony Blair’s government were actually ended in Scotland in 2001.  After Scotland voted for devolution, the newly-formed Scottish Parliament took over responsibility for education with the first elections taking place in 1999. The election was won by Scottish Labour, who formed a coalition government with the Liberal Democrats.  The Lib Dems made the scrapping of tuition fees a central part of their election manifesto, and secured the pledge as part of their negotiations to join the coalition with Labour. An independent study, the Cubie Report, was set up and recommended that up-front fees should be ended.  However, the report stopped short of backing completely free university education, instead suggesting a graduate endowment which would help to fund bursaries and meant students would pay back a portion of fees after graduating and earning above a repayment threshold.  In 2001, this was accepted by the Scottish Executive, with the initial endowment set at £2,000 to be paid back once students earned over £10,000. The first students began paying in 2005, and 20,684 paid the endowment fee before it was scrapped, according to a Scottish Parliament Information Centre (SPICe)  The ending of fees, which the First Minister and SNP are referring to, is the scrapping of the graduate endowment put in place by the earlier Labour/Lib-dem administration. This took place in 2008, as part of the Scottish Government’s pledge to return to “free university education”.  When the scheme ended, the endowment was set at £2,289 and, if taken out as a loan, students would be required to pay once they earned more than £15,000 per year. Around half of students did not have to pay the endowment, which came with a number of exemptions including those on low-incomes, mature students and single parents.  The scrapping of the scheme passed through the Scottish Parliament by 67 votes to 61, after forming part of the SNP’s 2007 election manifesto. It covered students who graduated on or after April 1, 2007. Scottish students now pay no upfront fees nor an endowment after they graduate.  It is important to note that while Scottish students are entitled to free university education, those from other UK nations are required to pay if they come to study in Scotland. Free education also extends to those students from European Union member states on the same basis as Scottish students. However, this may change after the UK leaves the EU in 2019.  Nicola Sturgeon’s claim that the SNP ended tuition fees is not entirely accurate. Up-front fees were abolished by Labour in Scotland (after Tony Blair’s government introduced them in 1998) under pressure from the Liberal Democrats and many students were exempted from the Graduate Endowment scheme the coalition put in place. The SNP can, however, accurately say it introduced free university education by scrapping the graduate endowment.  The Ferret was established in 2015 with a mission to publish fearless, high quality journalism. Since then thousands of people have joined us. We hope you will too. We're a cooperative with places reserved for both our writers and subscribers on the board. We're independently regulated, and work hard to keep our overheads down. This means that all the money we get from our subscribers is invested directly in original public interest news. We're avowedly non-partisan so we can treat everyone fairly. We don't publish click bait and we don't do favours for political parties or powerful vested interests. We do help to change things. Or see your other subscription options. Tell us what you'd like us to write about next and vote up the best ideas.
4. When it comes to all young people, it’s not possible to say if young people are in record levels of debt.  The official statistics we have suggest that the average debt for 16-24 year olds rose in the late noughties, but fell slightly between 2010-12 and 2012-14.  We can’t say for sure what has happened because this doesn’t account for inflation, or for possible error in the survey the statistics come from. We don’t have any more recent figures than this.  Mr Corbyn’s office pointed us to analysis by the Institute for Fiscal Studies about the debts of English graduates to back up this claim. The report says that English graduates have the highest student debts in the developed world. At over £50,000, the average debt on graduation is more than double what it was in 2011 before the large increase in tuition fees in 2012.  About half of young people study at university level in England.  The chief of the Financial Conduct Authority told the BBC earlier this week:  "There is a pronounced build up of indebtedness amongst the younger age group," Mr Bailey said.  "We should not think this is reckless borrowing, this is directed at essential living costs. It is not credit in the classic sense, it is [about] the affordability of basic living in many cases."  He also said "There has been a clear shift in the generational pattern of wealth and income, and that translates into a greater indebtedness at a younger age”.  The Financial Conduct Authority told us these comments weren’t based on one piece of research or set of data in particular.  A survey published by the Authority today found 18-24 year olds had the lowest level of financial resilience, and that 55% had unsecured debt including student loans. This is the first time it has done this survey so there is no comparable data.
5. £100 billion: the cost of writing off student debt?  In its 2017 manifesto, the Labour party pledged to abolish university tuition fees.  There are two costs potentially associated with this. The first is the cost of scrapping the tuition fees (and associated loans) of future students—this is the policy in Labour’s manifesto. The second is the possibility of wiping off the amounts owed by current graduates—which Labour has separately said it would like to try to do.  It was the latter that Angela Rayner, Labour’s Shadow Education Secretary, was talking about when she referred to a £100 billion cost. When asked on Sunday’s BBC’s Andrew Marr Show how much wiping out current student debt would cost, Angela Rayner said “it’s £100 billion which they estimate currently, which will increase”.  The Student Loans Company has put the outstanding balance due from student loans in England at £89.3 billion (which includes English students studying in the UK, and EU students studying in England). This isn’t just about tuition fee loans—it also includes the cost of maintenance loans. It goes up to £100.5 billion UK wide.  But there are a few reasons to think the cost would not be as high as this—at least when talking about the current amount of student debt (the total amount of debt is increasing each year as more students go to university).  The government already writes off some student loan debt  First, as Ms Rayner said on the programme, the government already ‘writes off’ a certain amount of this anyway due to the way the system is designed.  Graduates only start to repay their debts when they reach a certain income threshold (currently £21,000 for students taking out a loan since 2012) and have their debts written off if they’re not repaid after 30 years (or after 25 years for students who started courses between 2006 and 2012).  So a certain amount is always expected not to be paid back.  The cost would depend on which loans were written off  Second, this £89 billion includes the cost of maintenance loans and tuition fee loans before the higher £9,000 fees came in back in 2012. When discussing the idea, Jeremy Corbyn was talking about alleviating those “that had the historical misfortune to be at university during the £9,000 period”. Some have interpreted this to mean the policy would focus on these graduates.  So if the focus is on wiping off only tuition fee debts for students studying in the £9,000 period, the cost would be lower. The Institute for Fiscal Studies has estimated the outstanding stock of loans for these graduates is roughly £30 billion (but this still excludes the amount of these that are already expected not to be repaid).  These costs are separate to the costs of removing future tuition fees, which the IFS has looked into here.

After Ranking Candidates:

1. Student debt: what did Labour say?  Jeremy Corbyn didn’t commit to abolishing student debt before the last election, although he did say he would “deal with” the high debts of graduates and was looking at ways to do so.  The official Labour policy for existing graduates was that they would be protected from above inflation interest rate rises on existing debt and Labour would “look for ways to ameliorate this debt burden in future.” This policy was not mentioned in the party’s manifesto.  Mr Corbyn did say in an interview with NME magazine a week before the 2017 general election that he was “looking at” ways to reduce, ameliorate, or lengthen the period of time that “those that currently have a massive debt” have to pay it off. He also said he didn’t “have a simple answer for it at this stage”.  Those who didn’t see the detail of Mr Corbyn’s comments may have got a stronger impression from some of the wider news headlines. The Times reported “Labour promises to write off graduate debt”, and iNews reported “Jeremy Corbyn: Labour will write off graduate debt”—specifying in the detail of the article that it was something Mr Corbyn had “suggested”.  Other Labour figures during the election campaign did hint that abolishing—as opposed to reducing—debt was the policy.  During the interview Mr Corbyn is quoted as saying:  “First of all, we want to get rid of student fees altogether ... “We’ll do it as soon as we get in, and we’ll then introduce legislation to ensure that any student going from the 2017-18 academic year will not pay fees. They will pay them, but we’ll rebate them when we’ve got the legislation through – that’s fundamentally the principle behind it. “Yes, there is a block of those that currently have a massive debt, and I’m looking at ways that we could reduce that, ameliorate that, lengthen the period of paying it off, or some other means of reducing that debt burden ... “I don’t have the simple answer for it at this stage – I don’t think anybody would expect me to, because this election was called unexpectedly; we had two weeks to prepare all of this – but I’m very well aware of that problem ... “And I don’t see why those that had the historical misfortune to be at university during the £9,000 period should be burdened excessively compared to those that went before or those that come after. I will deal with it.”  Some Labour figures have sown confusion about the policy  Both Jeremy Corbyn and the Shadow Chancellor, John McDonnell, said in interviews after the election that abolishing student debt was never promised, but that it was a “real ambition”. The Shadow Education Secretary, Angela Rayner, also told MPs that this was never the promise.  During the election, however, some Labour figures seemed to have sown confusion about the policy.  Labour’s shadow justice minister Imran Hussain said in a video that “every existing student will have all their debts wiped off”. Another shadow minister, Sharon Hodgson, tweeted that “Labour could write off historic student debts| All those in early 20's with student debt”.  The first doesn’t say that graduates would also have their debts wiped off, and the second doesn’t say the pledge is a certainty. Nevertheless, compared to Mr Corbyn’s “looking at ways that we could reduce that, ameliorate that, lengthen the period of paying it off, or some other means of reducing that debt burden”, both interventions could have given voters the wrong idea about what was being promised.
2. Jeremy Corbyn has been accused of U-turning on a pledge to scrap student debt.  But that’s not true. The story comes from a single quote plucked from a longer interview.  When read in context, rather than promising to wipe out all student debts, the Labour leader actually admitted that he didn’t have any simple answers to the issue yet.  So what was said, exactly? And has Labour been misleading students?  In the run-up to the general election, Jeremy Corbyn made a comment about student debt. Speaking to the NME about the issue, he said: “I will deal with it.”  At the time, this was not widely picked up on by the national media. But – where it was reported – most papers accurately reflected that Corbyn had not explicitly promised to write off all debts. For instance, the Daily Mail said the Labour leader had pledged to “reduce or even write off” student debt.  But then, on Sunday, Corbyn was quizzed about this remark during a BBC interview.  Presenter Andrew Marr put it to him: “If you are a young voter and you heard those words: ‘I will deal with it’, you might have thought Jeremy Corbyn is going to relieve me of my debt.”  Corbyn was forced to defend his position, saying: “We never said we would completely abolish it.”  For some, this constituted a U-turn.  The Mail said: “Labour has backtracked on its promise to write off £100 billion of student debt.” The Telegraph said the party had “retracted its pledge to abolish student debt”. And Alan Sugar called Jeremy Corbyn a “cheat” and said he should resign for having “lied”.  So, did Corbyn really promise to write-off existing student debt?  It’s true that he promised to “deal” with the problem of people who are “burdened with student debt”. But this was just one sentence from a much longer interview.  The full context is important – and has been ignored by many critics.  He told the NME: “There is a block of those that currently have a massive debt, and I’m looking at ways that we could reduce that, ameliorate that, lengthen the period of paying it off, or some other means of reducing that debt burden.”  He added: “I don’t have the simple answer for it at this stage – I don’t think anybody would expect me to, because this election was called unexpectedly; we had two weeks to prepare all of this. But I’m very well aware of that problem.  “And I don’t see why those that had the historical misfortune to be at university during the £9,000 period should be burdened excessively compared to those that went before or those that come after. I will deal with it.”  In context, it is clear that Corbyn stopped short of making any specific pledge about completely writing-off all student debts.  It’s true that he was appealing to young voters by promising to address the issue and trying to reduce the burden of student debt. But at no point did he make any policy commitments. In fact, he explicitly said that he didn’t have an firm answers yet.  What’s more, none of the possible solutions he mentioned included wiping out all debt. Instead, he talked about reducing or ameliorating (which simply means to make the situation easier) the burden of student debts.  And this was not actually a new Labour position. The party had already said it would “look for ways to ameliorate this debt burden in future”.  Indeed, while Labour’s manifesto promised to “abolish university tuition fees” and said that many young people are “held back by debt”, it made no mention of writing off student debts, or anything similar.  Have other Labour MPs pledged to write off the debt?  After Labour denied changing its policy, two main pieces of further evidence of a U-turn have been circulating.  First is a video of shadow justice minister Imran Hussain, filmed during the election campaign. In it, he comments on the fact that Jeremy Corbyn had announced that “every existing student will have all their debt wiped off”.  Some have claimed that Hussain’s comment appears “at odds with Jeremy Corbyn’s insistence that the party never made that specific pledge”.  But it’s a bit more complicated than that.  The key phrase here is “every existing student“. But it seems that some critics have conflated this with all existing student debt, which would include that held by thousands of graduates. Clearly, however, these are two very different things.  The actual policy announcement Hussain was referring to appears to have been pretty close to what he said it was – a promise to scrap debts for existing students only, rather than historic debts held by graduates.  And this was not a secret pledge consigned to a single YouTube video. It was a major policy announcement that was widely reported in the press.  “To discourage students who are planning to start university this September from deferring until after tuition fees are removed, we will guarantee to immediately write off their first year of fees.  “Students part way through their degree will not have to pay fees for the remainder of their course. Part-time students will be covered for the cost of their first undergraduate degree.”  Regarding the debts of people who have already graduated, Labour did not promise to write these off. Echoing Corbyn’s comments, the party simply said they would consider ways to improve the situation for those concerned.  The only aspect of the policy that Hussain appears to have exaggerated or misunderstood concerns debt already racked up by existing students. The official pledge was to only wipe the debt “for the remainder of their course”, whereas Hussain said existing students would have “all their debt wiped off”.  This was clearly wrong and misleading. But Hussain made no comment about the far more costly issue of wiping all debt for all graduates.  The second example that is being cited as proof of a Labour U-turn is a tweet from a shadow minister, Sharon Hodgson, in which she said that Labour “could write off historic student debts”.  It seems that this was actually a headline from a Politics Home article, following up from the NME interview, rather than her own comment. But that doesn’t diminish her responsibility for the tweet, which does appear to confirm a policy commitment that had not been made.  There is no doubt that these words were very misleading.  In fairness to Hodgson, she did say “could” rather than “will”, but that will do little to reconcile any voters who feel misled by her tweet.  Corbyn has not U-turned on student debt, because he never made a commitment to do this in the first place. He expressed sympathy with debt-laden graduates and promised to help ease the burden on them. But – as far as we can tell – he never pledged to write off all graduate debts.  For Hussain, it is more complicated. The main accusation against Labour concerns U-turning on an alleged promise to wipe the debts of all students and graduates. Hussain made no promises about the debts of graduates but, regarding existing students, he slipped up by saying all debt would be wiped, rather than just the future debts.  Hodgson, on the other hand, posted a highly misleading tweet. Strictly speaking, it was not entirely inaccurate, but it clearly alluded to a policy that the party had not committed to.
3. £100 billion: the cost of writing off student debt?  In its 2017 manifesto, the Labour party pledged to abolish university tuition fees.  There are two costs potentially associated with this. The first is the cost of scrapping the tuition fees (and associated loans) of future students—this is the policy in Labour’s manifesto. The second is the possibility of wiping off the amounts owed by current graduates—which Labour has separately said it would like to try to do.  It was the latter that Angela Rayner, Labour’s Shadow Education Secretary, was talking about when she referred to a £100 billion cost. When asked on Sunday’s BBC’s Andrew Marr Show how much wiping out current student debt would cost, Angela Rayner said “it’s £100 billion which they estimate currently, which will increase”.  The Student Loans Company has put the outstanding balance due from student loans in England at £89.3 billion (which includes English students studying in the UK, and EU students studying in England). This isn’t just about tuition fee loans—it also includes the cost of maintenance loans. It goes up to £100.5 billion UK wide.  But there are a few reasons to think the cost would not be as high as this—at least when talking about the current amount of student debt (the total amount of debt is increasing each year as more students go to university).  The government already writes off some student loan debt  First, as Ms Rayner said on the programme, the government already ‘writes off’ a certain amount of this anyway due to the way the system is designed.  Graduates only start to repay their debts when they reach a certain income threshold (currently £21,000 for students taking out a loan since 2012) and have their debts written off if they’re not repaid after 30 years (or after 25 years for students who started courses between 2006 and 2012).  So a certain amount is always expected not to be paid back.  The cost would depend on which loans were written off  Second, this £89 billion includes the cost of maintenance loans and tuition fee loans before the higher £9,000 fees came in back in 2012. When discussing the idea, Jeremy Corbyn was talking about alleviating those “that had the historical misfortune to be at university during the £9,000 period”. Some have interpreted this to mean the policy would focus on these graduates.  So if the focus is on wiping off only tuition fee debts for students studying in the £9,000 period, the cost would be lower. The Institute for Fiscal Studies has estimated the outstanding stock of loans for these graduates is roughly £30 billion (but this still excludes the amount of these that are already expected not to be repaid).  These costs are separate to the costs of removing future tuition fees, which the IFS has looked into here.
4. When it comes to all young people, it’s not possible to say if young people are in record levels of debt.  The official statistics we have suggest that the average debt for 16-24 year olds rose in the late noughties, but fell slightly between 2010-12 and 2012-14.  We can’t say for sure what has happened because this doesn’t account for inflation, or for possible error in the survey the statistics come from. We don’t have any more recent figures than this.  Mr Corbyn’s office pointed us to analysis by the Institute for Fiscal Studies about the debts of English graduates to back up this claim. The report says that English graduates have the highest student debts in the developed world. At over £50,000, the average debt on graduation is more than double what it was in 2011 before the large increase in tuition fees in 2012.  About half of young people study at university level in England.  The chief of the Financial Conduct Authority told the BBC earlier this week:  "There is a pronounced build up of indebtedness amongst the younger age group," Mr Bailey said.  "We should not think this is reckless borrowing, this is directed at essential living costs. It is not credit in the classic sense, it is [about] the affordability of basic living in many cases."  He also said "There has been a clear shift in the generational pattern of wealth and income, and that translates into a greater indebtedness at a younger age”.  The Financial Conduct Authority told us these comments weren’t based on one piece of research or set of data in particular.  A survey published by the Authority today found 18-24 year olds had the lowest level of financial resilience, and that 55% had unsecured debt including student loans. This is the first time it has done this survey so there is no comparable data.
5. The issue of tuition fees has been in the spotlight recently as Jeremy Corbyn indicated that a Labour government would “deal with” student debt.  While the party’s 2017 general election manifesto gained notoriety for its promise to scrap tuition fees in England, politicians and commentators in Scotland noted that the policy had already been in place here for a number of years.  However, there are disagreements over which party was responsible for ending tuition fees north of the border.  Reflecting on ten years of SNP governance, Nicola Sturgeon listed the ending of tuition fees as one of her party’s greatest successes.  Ferret Fact Service assessed this claim and found it to be Mostly True  University tuition fees were reintroduced by Tony Blair’s government in 1998, amid huge protest from students and many backbench Labour MPs. The Teaching and Higher Education Act meant students across the UK would pay up to £1000 per year for study.  In Scotland, where university courses were generally completed over four years rather than three, students were given a fee concession, paid for by the Scottish Executive (now known as Scottish Government).  Nicola Sturgeon’s claim is that her party scrapped tuition fees in 2008 during the first Salmond government, however, the up-front fees introduced by Tony Blair’s government were actually ended in Scotland in 2001.  After Scotland voted for devolution, the newly-formed Scottish Parliament took over responsibility for education with the first elections taking place in 1999. The election was won by Scottish Labour, who formed a coalition government with the Liberal Democrats.  The Lib Dems made the scrapping of tuition fees a central part of their election manifesto, and secured the pledge as part of their negotiations to join the coalition with Labour. An independent study, the Cubie Report, was set up and recommended that up-front fees should be ended.  However, the report stopped short of backing completely free university education, instead suggesting a graduate endowment which would help to fund bursaries and meant students would pay back a portion of fees after graduating and earning above a repayment threshold.  In 2001, this was accepted by the Scottish Executive, with the initial endowment set at £2,000 to be paid back once students earned over £10,000. The first students began paying in 2005, and 20,684 paid the endowment fee before it was scrapped, according to a Scottish Parliament Information Centre (SPICe)  The ending of fees, which the First Minister and SNP are referring to, is the scrapping of the graduate endowment put in place by the earlier Labour/Lib-dem administration. This took place in 2008, as part of the Scottish Government’s pledge to return to “free university education”.  When the scheme ended, the endowment was set at £2,289 and, if taken out as a loan, students would be required to pay once they earned more than £15,000 per year. Around half of students did not have to pay the endowment, which came with a number of exemptions including those on low-incomes, mature students and single parents.  The scrapping of the scheme passed through the Scottish Parliament by 67 votes to 61, after forming part of the SNP’s 2007 election manifesto. It covered students who graduated on or after April 1, 2007. Scottish students now pay no upfront fees nor an endowment after they graduate.  It is important to note that while Scottish students are entitled to free university education, those from other UK nations are required to pay if they come to study in Scotland. Free education also extends to those students from European Union member states on the same basis as Scottish students. However, this may change after the UK leaves the EU in 2019.  Nicola Sturgeon’s claim that the SNP ended tuition fees is not entirely accurate. Up-front fees were abolished by Labour in Scotland (after Tony Blair’s government introduced them in 1998) under pressure from the Liberal Democrats and many students were exempted from the Graduate Endowment scheme the coalition put in place. The SNP can, however, accurately say it introduced free university education by scrapping the graduate endowment.  The Ferret was established in 2015 with a mission to publish fearless, high quality journalism. Since then thousands of people have joined us. We hope you will too. We're a cooperative with places reserved for both our writers and subscribers on the board. We're independently regulated, and work hard to keep our overheads down. This means that all the money we get from our subscribers is invested directly in original public interest news. We're avowedly non-partisan so we can treat everyone fairly. We don't publish click bait and we don't do favours for political parties or powerful vested interests. We do help to change things. Or see your other subscription options. Tell us what you'd like us to write about next and vote up the best ideas.